gh-1691 create an overview page about indexes (#1847)
tarantool/doc: doc/book/box/indexes.rst

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
================================================================================
Indexes
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
================================================================================

An **index** is a group of key values and pointers.
An **index** is a special data structure that stores a group of key values and
pointers. It is used for efficient manipulations with data.

As with spaces, you should specify the index **name**, and let Tarantool
come up with a unique **numeric identifier** ("index id").

An index always has a **type**. The default index type is 'TREE'.
TREE indexes are provided by all Tarantool engines, can index unique and
non-unique values, support partial key searches, comparisons and ordered results.

> Additionally, memtx engine supports HASH, RTREE and BITSET indexes.

Reviewer: It would be great to add some brief description about type - that "special data structures" could be different and should be chosen dependent on a task.

and it must be unique. All other indexes are called **secondary indexes**,
and they may be non-unique.

Indexes have certain limitations. See details on page
:doc:`Limitations </book/box/limitations>`.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Creating an index
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

An index definition may include identifiers of tuple fields and their expected
**types**. See allowed indexed field types in section
:ref:`Details about indexed field types <details_about_index_field_types>`.

..  NOTE::

    A recommended design pattern for a data model is to base primary keys on the
    first fields of a tuple, because this speeds up tuple comparison.

> Let's look on an example where we first define the primary index (named 'primary')

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's look at an example where we first define the primary index (named 'primary')
```

based on field #1 of each tuple:

..  code-block:: tarantoolsession

    tarantool> i = s:create_index('primary', {type = 'hash', parts = {{field = 1, type = 'unsigned'}}}

The effect is that, for all tuples in space 'tester', field #1 must exist and
must contain an unsigned integer.

> The index type is HASH, so values in field #1 must be unique, because keys

Reviewer 2: this is good )

in HASH indexes are unique.

After that, let's define a secondary index (named 'secondary') based on field #2
of each tuple:

..  code-block:: tarantoolsession

    tarantool> i = s:create_index('secondary', {type = 'tree', parts = {field = 2, type = 'string'}})

The effect is that, for all tuples in space 'tester', field #2 must exist and
must contain a string.
The index type is TREE, so values in field #2 must not be unique, because keys
in TREE indexes may be non-unique.

Space definitions and index definitions are stored permanently in Tarantool's
system spaces :ref:`_space <box_space-space>` and :ref:`_index <box_space-index>`
(for details, see reference on :ref:`box.space <box_space>` submodule).

> ..  admonition:: Tip

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
..  admonition:: tip
```
Do we have CSS for `tip`?

Author: no, this is just a title for admonition

    :class: fact

    The full information about creating an index is in section
    :doc:`/reference/reference_lua/box_space/create_index`.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Index types
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

An index always has a **type**. Different types are intended for different
usage scenarios.

We give an overview of index features in the following table:

..  container:: table

    ..  list-table::
        :header-rows: 1

        *   - Feature
            - TREE
            - HASH
            - RTREE
            - BITSET

        *   - unique
            - \+
            - \+
            - \-
            - \-

        *   - non-unique
            - \+
            - \-
            - \+
            - \+

        *   - :ref:`is_nullable <box_space-is_nullable>`
            - \+
            - \-
            - \-
            - \-

>         *   - multi-part

Reviewer 2: “can be multi-part”?

        *   - :ref:`multikey <box_space-path_multikey>`
            - \+
            - \-
            - \-
            - \-

        *   - :ref:`partial-key search <partial_key_search>`
            - \+
            - \-
            - \-
            - \-

        *   - can be primary key
            - \+
            - \+
            - \-
            - \-

        *   - exclude_null (version 2.8+)
            - \+
            - \-
            - \-
            - \-

        *   - :doc:`iterator types </reference/reference_lua/box_index/pairs>`
            - ALL, EQ, REQ, GT, GE, LT, LE
            - ALL, EQ, GT
            - ALL, EQ, GT, GE, LT, LE, OVERLAPS, NEIGHBOR
            - ALL, EQ, BITS_ALL_SET, BITS_ANY_SET, BITS_ALL_NOT_SET

********************************************************************************
TREE indexes
********************************************************************************

The default index type is 'TREE'.
TREE indexes are provided by memtx and vinyl engines, can index unique and
non-unique values, support partial key searches, comparisons and ordered results.

This is a universal type of indexes, for most cases it will be the best choice.

> Additionally, memtx engine supports HASH, RTREE and BITSET indexes.

Reviewer 2: If vinyl doesn't support other types, write it in the sections about other types.
Or maybe it can fit in the comparison table above.

********************************************************************************
HASH indexes
********************************************************************************

HASH indexes require unique fields and loses to TREE in almost all respects.
So we do not recommend to use it in the applications.
HASH is now present in Tarantool mainly because of backward compatibility.

Here are some tips. Do not use HASH index:

* just if you want to
* if you think that HASH is faster with no performance metering
* if you want to iterate over the data
* for primary key
* as an only index

Use HASH index:

* if it is a secondary key
* if you 100% won't need to make it non-unique
* if you really need that 2-5% performance improvement

> * if you have taken measurements on your data and you see this increase in performance

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* if you have taken measurements on your data and you see an increase in performance
```

* if you save every byte on tuples (HASH is a little more compact)

********************************************************************************
RTREE indexes
********************************************************************************

> RTREE is a multidimensional index supporting up to 32 number of dimensions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
RTREE is a multidimensional index supporting up to 32 dimensions.
```

> It is used especially for indexing spacial information, such as geographical

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is used especially for indexing spatial information, such as geographical
```

objects. In :ref:`this example <box_index-rtree>`

> we demonstrate spacial searches via RTREE index.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
we demonstrate spatial searches via RTREE index.
```

RTREE index can accept two types of ``distance`` functions:
``euclid`` and ``manhattan``.

**Example:**

..  code-block:: tarantoolsession

    tarantool> box.schema.space.create('rtree_example')
    tarantool> box.space.rtree_example:create_index('primary')
    tarantool> box.space.rtree_example:create_index('rtree',{unique=false,type='RTREE', parts={2,'ARRAY'}})
    tarantool> box.space.rtree_example:insert{1, {3, 5, 9, 10}}
    tarantool> box.space.rtree_example:insert{2, {10, 11}}
    tarantool> box.space.rtree_example.index.rtree:select({4, 7, 5, 9}, {iterator = 'GT'})

The result will be:

..  code-block:: tarantoolsession

    ---
    - - [1, [3, 5, 9, 10]]
    ...

because a rectangle whose corners are at coordinates ``4,7,5,9`` is entirely
within a rectangle whose corners are at coordinates ``3,5,9,10``.

********************************************************************************
BITSET indexes
********************************************************************************

Bitset is a bit mask. You should use it when you need to search by bit masks.

> This can be, for example, storing a vector of attributes and search by these attributes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This can be, for example, storing a vector of attributes and searching by these attributes.
```

**Example 1:**

> The following script shows creation and search with a BITSET index.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following script shows creating and searching with a BITSET index.
```

Reviewer 2: nouns → verbs, it sounds more alive this way

    tarantool> s.index.bitset_index:select(0x02, {
             >   iterator = box.index.BITS_ALL_NOT_SET
             > })
    ---
    - - ['Tuple with bit value = 01', 1]
    ...

**Example 2:**

..  code-block:: tarantoolsession

    tarantool> box.schema.space.create('bitset_example')
    tarantool> box.space.bitset_example:create_index('primary')
    tarantool> box.space.bitset_example:create_index('bitset',{unique=false,type='BITSET', parts={2,'unsigned'}})
    tarantool> box.space.bitset_example:insert{1,1}
    tarantool> box.space.bitset_example:insert{2,4}
    tarantool> box.space.bitset_example:insert{3,7}
    tarantool> box.space.bitset_example:insert{4,3}
    tarantool> box.space.bitset_example.index.bitset:select(2, {iterator='BITS_ANY_SET'})

The result will be:

..  code-block:: tarantoolsession

    ---
    - - [3, 7]
      - [4, 3]
    ...

because (7 AND 2) is not equal to 0, and (3 AND 2) is not equal to 0.

Additionally, there exist
:doc:`index iterator operations </reference/reference_lua/box_index/pairs>`.
They can only be used with code in Lua and C/C++. Index iterators are for
traversing indexes one key at a time, taking advantage of features that are

> specific to an index type, for example evaluating Boolean expressions when
> traversing BITSET indexes, or going in descending order when traversing TREE indexes.

Reviewer 2: the sentence is too long, let's split it.
```suggestion
specific to an index type.
For example, they can be used for evaluating Boolean expressions when
traversing BITSET indexes, or for going in descending order when traversing TREE indexes.
```

.. _index-box_index-operations:

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Index operations
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Index operations are automatic: if a data-manipulation request changes a tuple,
then it also changes the index keys defined for the tuple.

The simple index-creation operation that we've illustrated before is:

> .. cssclass:: highlight
> .. parsed-literal::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
..  cssclass:: highlight
..  parsed-literal::
```

    :samp:`box.space.{space-name}:create_index('{index-name}')`

This creates a unique TREE index on the first field of all tuples
(often called "Field#1"), which is assumed to be numeric.

The simple SELECT request that we've illustrated before is:

> .. cssclass:: highlight
> .. parsed-literal::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
..  cssclass:: highlight
..  parsed-literal::
```

    :extsamp:`box.space.{*{space-name}*}:select({*{value}*})`

This looks for a single tuple via the first index. Since the first index

> is always unique, the maximum number of returned tuples will be: one.

Reviewer 2: why the `:` ?

> You can call ``select()`` without arguments, causing all tuples to be returned.

Reviewer 2: passive → active voice
```suggestion
You can call ``select()`` without arguments, and it will return all tuples.
```

Let's continue working with the space 'tester' created in the :ref:`"Getting
started" exercises <getting_started_db>` but first modify it:

.. code-block:: tarantoolsession

    tarantool> box.space.tester:format({
             > {name = 'id', type = 'unsigned'},
             > {name = 'band_name', type = 'string'},
             > {name = 'year', type = 'unsigned'},
             > {name = 'rate', type = 'unsigned', is_nullable=true}})
    ---
    ...

Add the rate to the tuple #1 and #2:

.. code-block:: tarantoolsession

    tarantool> box.space.tester:update(1, {{'=', 4, 5}})
    ---
    - [1, 'Roxette', 1986, 5]
    ...
    tarantool> box.space.tester:update(2, {{'=', 4, 4}})
    ---
    - [2, 'Scorpions', 2015, 4]
    ...

> And insert another tuple:

Reviewer 3: Please, add links to the Reference section for each index function

.. code-block:: tarantoolsession

    tarantool> box.space.tester:insert({4, 'Roxette', 2016, 3})
    ---
    - [4, 'Roxette', 2016, 3]
    ...

**The existing SELECT variations:**

> 1. The search can use comparisons other than equality.

Reviewer 2: Indent all contents of this list item with 4 spaces. Same for the next list items. Otherwise you're breaking the list.

Author: sure, I think I lost indents when moved this part from another section

.. code-block:: tarantoolsession

    tarantool> box.space.tester:select(1, {iterator = 'GT'})
    ---
    - - [2, 'Scorpions', 2015, 4]
      - [3, 'Ace of Base', 1993]
      - [4, 'Roxette', 2016, 3]
    ...

The :ref:`comparison operators <box_index-iterator-types>` are LT, LE, EQ, REQ, GE, GT
(for "less than", "less than or equal", "equal", "reversed equal",
"greater than or equal", "greater than" respectively).

> Comparisons make sense if and only if the index type is ‘TREE'.

Reviewer 2: wrong type of quote )
```suggestion
Comparisons make sense if and only if the index type is 'TREE'.
```

            - ALL, EQ, GT, GE, LT, LE, OVERLAPS, NEIGHBOR
            - ALL, EQ, BITS_ALL_SET, BITS_ANY_SET, BITS_ALL_NOT_SET

********************************************************************************
TREE indexes
********************************************************************************

The default index type is 'TREE'.
TREE indexes are provided by memtx and vinyl engines, can index unique and
non-unique values, support partial key searches, comparisons and ordered results.

This is a universal type of indexes, for most cases it will be the best choice.

Additionally, memtx engine supports HASH, RTREE and BITSET indexes.

********************************************************************************
HASH indexes
********************************************************************************

HASH indexes require unique fields and loses to TREE in almost all respects.
So we do not recommend to use it in the applications.
HASH is now present in Tarantool mainly because of backward compatibility.

Here are some tips. Do not use HASH index:

* just if you want to
* if you think that HASH is faster with no performance metering
* if you want to iterate over the data

> * for primary key

Reviewer: It would be great to describe why

Author: Doesn't the first paragraph describe it well?

Reviewer: The first paragraph contradicts part below - `if you really need that 2-5% performance improvement` (that means that for some tasks it's more appropriate than TREE) and `if you save every byte on tuples` (to be honest, it looks like sneer) - yes, for some tasks it's important to save as much memory as possible.

Reviewer 4: Ok, let's rewrite `if you really need that 2-5% performance improvement` as `if you measure, that it will give you accountable performance improvement`

> if you save every byte on tuples (to be honest, it looks like sneer) - yes, for some tasks it's important to save as much memory as possible.
See nothing wrong. In **that** case HASH is appropriate. "Normal" users should not use hash: it gives in future more problems, than gains.

* as an only index

Use HASH index:

* if it is a secondary key
* if you 100% won't need to make it non-unique
* if you really need that 2-5% performance improvement
* if you have taken measurements on your data and you see an increase in performance
* if you save every byte on tuples (HASH is a little more compact)

********************************************************************************

> RTREE indexes

Reviewer: Still we have this part (https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/wiki/R-tree-index-quick-start-and-usage) is out of our doc.

Author: haven't seen it before, actually
thanks, I'll add it

********************************************************************************

> RTREE is a multidimensional index supporting up to 32 dimensions.

Reviewer: AFAIK "up to 20" dimensions - https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/blob/f8449727a02e588f6455d937089a96ed3bcf194f/src/lib/salad/rtree.h#L71

It is used especially for indexing spatial information, such as geographical
objects. In :ref:`this example <box_index-rtree>`
we demonstrate spatial searches via RTREE index.

RTREE index can accept two types of ``distance`` functions:
``euclid`` and ``manhattan``.

**Example:**

..  code-block:: tarantoolsession

    tarantool> box.schema.space.create('rtree_example')
    tarantool> box.space.rtree_example:create_index('primary')
    tarantool> box.space.rtree_example:create_index('rtree',{unique=false,type='RTREE', parts={2,'ARRAY'}})
    tarantool> box.space.rtree_example:insert{1, {3, 5, 9, 10}}
    tarantool> box.space.rtree_example:insert{2, {10, 11}}
    tarantool> box.space.rtree_example.index.rtree:select({4, 7, 5, 9}, {iterator = 'GT'})

The result will be:

..  code-block:: tarantoolsession

    ---
    - - [1, [3, 5, 9, 10]]
    ...

because a rectangle whose corners are at coordinates ``4,7,5,9`` is entirely
within a rectangle whose corners are at coordinates ``3,5,9,10``.

********************************************************************************

> BITSET indexes

Reviewer: At this page https://tarantool-develop.herokuapp.com/en/doc/latest/book/box/data_model/ we have

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/8830475/108992738-b221a780-76aa-11eb-8a74-4491c2a7f77c.png)

Actually it's not so after https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues/5071
